---
layout: post
name: Noah Rogers
title: Why I love web design
date: May 18, 2015
blog: true
---

My absolute favorite thing about web design is the ability to build something from nothing. It's kind of like an artist who paints a picture. We start with blank canvas and end up creating fully functional websites at the end.

#### Too much freedom
All the freedom can be a little overwhelming, but if you think about it this is, by far, one of our biggest luxuries. This is great simply because we can do almost anything we want to.


#### Have a plan
I think what is most important is to have a plan. Think about what you want to do, talk about with friends and teammates, and start to create the design. I think a clear idea will lead to a great final product.

#### The cutting edge
Web development puts us on the forefront of the technology industry. Technology changes fast, and with the continuous introduction of new platforms, frameworks and languages, there is always something new and exciting to learn about.

There is some really cool stuff that is possible, all we have to do is take the time to understand it.

#### Each project is not without it's challenges.
Remember though, you will almost certainly run in to some sort of problems. Try using these hurdles as opportunities for you to continue your learning or refine what you already know.

Use your learning history and past projects as tools so that when these problems present themselves you can easily overcome them.

Why do you love web design as much as I do? [Tweet me](https://twitter.com/treyd0r) and let me know what you think!
